---
layout: default
title:  "diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) & diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)"
date:   2022-01-28 11:06:00 +0100
categories: notes
tags: Neuroimaging
---

This set of notes contains summaries of diffussion MRI related information, currently based on Soares et al. 2013.

Diffusion-Weighted Imaging (DWI) is a variant of conventional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) based on the tissue water diffusion rate[^fn1]. Specifically, DWI refers to the acquired images, while Diffusion Tensor Imaging (DTI) refers to the tensor-based modeling of the DWI data.

To start, let's quickly cover the imaging techniques. MRI is an non-invasive and versatile imaging techniques. The MRI scanner forms a strong oscillating magnetic field, at the specified resonance frequency. The receiving coil then collects the response signal from atoms excited by the pulses. Some commonly used scan modalities in brain imaging include:

- Structural MRI (**T1**, **T2** and **PD**): makes use of the fact that atoms in different tissues return to the equilibrium state with different speed after excitation, to provide anatomical contrasts
- Functional MRI (**BOLD**): measures changes in blood oxygen level, which reflect brain regional activations causing higher energy consumption
- Diffusion MRI (**DWI** and **DTI**): measures the rate of water diffusion which, through DTI modelling, can also be used to map white matter tracts

## 1. DWI Artifacts & Preprocessing

DWI tend to have low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), low resolution, high susceptibility to motion artifacts high sensitivity to eddy current-induced distortions. As DWI is done through Echo Planar Imaging (EPI), it is also sensitive to EPI-related artifacts, e.g. field inhomogeneities. It was also reported that the vibration of the bed in the scanner could lead to small brain tissue movements (vibration artifact)[^fn1].

For proper DTI analysis, the images should be acquired with sufficiently high b-values (strength of magnetic diffusion gradient, $700-1000 s/mm^2$), spatial resolution ($2-2.5 mm$ isotropic), field of view (FOV, $240-256mm$), acquisition matrix ($96\times96-128\times128)$, echo time (TE, $50-70ms$), and repetition time (TR, $8.5-12s$)[^fn1]. With the appropriate raw data, preprocessing can then be done to reduce artifacts (and to exclude subjects/volumes/slices when the artifacts are uncorrectable). In general, the following steps should be considered[^fn1]:

1. **Visual inspection** of raw data for geometric distortions, signal dropouts, subtle system drifts, and missing slices. Automatic **outlier detection** methods may also be helpful.
2. **File format conversion** if necessary
3. **Eddy current and motion correction**, through affine and rigid body registration to the $b_0$ image
4. **Skull stripping** if necessary

Following these steps, tensors can be estimated. Visual inspection of tensor orientations and accounting for potential biases would be helpful.

## 2. DTI Analysis

In the gray matter (GM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), water movements are mostly **isotropic** (equally in all directions), while in the white matter (WM), water movements are **anisotropic** (differently in different directions), as water diffuses more rapidly along the axons than in other directions[^fn1]. Making use of this *assumption*, a 3x3 symmetric matrix (aka **tensors**) can be estimated at each voxel, usually through linear regression techniques, to model the diffusion process:

$$
\bar{D} = \begin{bmatrix} D_{xx} & D_{xy} & D_{xz} \\ D_{xy} & D_{yy}  & D_{yz} \\ D_{xz} & D_{yz}  & D_{zz} \end{bmatrix} 
$$

The tensors are difficult to visualise in their raw dimensionality. Hence, dimensionality reduction is generally necessary for visualisation purposes, resulting in 3-dimensional images of **tractography**. Alternatively, tensor glyphs may be employed for visualisation and quality control purposes, where tensors are represented in ellipsoides (or lines).

### 2.1. Tractography

WM tractography shows trajectories of fiber pathways (streamlines) in the 3-dimensional space, based on the eigenvectors of tensors. Generation of tractography follows these steps:

1. **Seeding**: defintion of the seed regions of interest (ROIs), either manually or based on a-priori networks. Alternatively, seeding the whole-brain may be preferred for data-driven approaches.
2. **Propagation**: generation of fibers
	- *Deterministic tractography*: reconstructs one fiber per seed
	- *Probabilistic tractography*: generates probability maps showing the likelihood of each voxel being part of a fiber, as well as multiple fiber directions per seed
3. **Termination** of fiber tracking based on *termination criteria*[^fn1]
	- minimum FA threshold ($0.1-0.3$ in adult, $0.1$ in infant)
	- turning angle threshold ($40-70\degree$)

The main difficulty in estimating tractography maps is the presence of multiple fibers along different directions in the same voxel, also referred to as **crossing fibers**. More sophisticated approaches involving, for instance, probability density functions instead of single tensors, may alleviate this issue.

### 2.2. Diffusivity and Anisotrpy Features

Based on each tensor, eigenvalues ($\lambda_1$ or **axial diffusivity**, $\lambda_2$, $\lambda_3$) representing the magnitude of diffusion, and eigenvectors ($e_1$, $e_2$, $e_3$) representing the directions of maximal and minimal diffusion, can also be computed at each voxel. Several features of anisotropy or diffusivity can then be computed using the eigenvalues:

- **Radial diffusivity** $\lambda_\perp = \frac{\lambda_2 + \lambda_3}{2}$
- **Mean diffusivity** $MD = \frac{\lambda_1 + \lambda_2 + \lambda_3}{3} = \frac{tr(\Lambda)}{3}$ 
- **Fractional anisotropy** $FA = \sqrt\frac{3[(\lambda_1-\mathbb{E}[\lambda])^2 + (\lambda_2-\mathbb{E}[\lambda])^2 + (\lambda_3-\mathbb{E}[\lambda])^2]}{2(\lambda_1^2 + \lambda_2^2 + \lambda_3^2)}$

In particular, FA measures the relative degree of a anisotropy, ranging from 0 (isotropic) to 1 (anisotropic). It should be noted that FA values are scalar and hence do not reflect the directions of anisotropy. Nevertheless, colored FA maps can be plotted where color-coded direction information is provided by the eigenvectors. 

The MD and FA values are commonly examined in relation to pathology. Typically, damaged tissues would have higher MD due to increased free diffusion and lower FA due to loss of coherence in the main preferred diffusion direction, but one should not assume that this is always the case[^fn1]. In studies of brain development, it has also been shown that MD decreases during childhood, adolescent, and into young adulthood, while FA increases[^fn2].

### 2.3. Voxel-based Analysis (VBA)

VBA compares diffusion maps in a voxel-wise manner across subjects in a standard space. While this allows direct correspondence to be drawn between voxel-wise features across subjects, the validity of the analysis relies on the accuracy of spatial normalisation (or registration) to the standard space. As DTI images are highly directional and topographical, it is preferrable to align the $b_0$ image to a T1 image and then to the standard template.

### 2.4. Tract-based Spatial Statistics (TBSS)

TBSS makes use of skeletonisation of group registered FA maps to detect group voxel-wise changes. The skeletonisation process aligns the local maxima of individual maps into a group map, thus allowing comparisons to be done with much fewer voxels. However, this assumes that the local maxima correspond to the same anatomical locations across subjects, which cannot always be guaranteed.

~~TODO: WM integrity assumptions?~~

[^fn1]: Soares JM, Marques P, Alves V, Sousa N. 2013. A hitchhiker's guide to diffusion tensor imaging. Frontiers in Neuroscience. 7. DOI: [https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2013.00031](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2013.00031)
[^fn2]: Lebel C, Beaulieu C. 2011. Longitudinal development of human brain wiring continues from chidhood into adulthood. Journal of Neuroscience. 31: 10937-10947. DOI: [https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5302-10.2011](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5302-10.2011)
